General
 The Hydrologic Soil Groups, designated A, B, C or D, are groups of soils that, when saturated, have the 
same runoff potential under similar storm and cover conditions. Soil properties that influence runoff 
potential are those that influence the minimum rate of infiltration for a bare soil after prolonged wetting 
and when not frozen. These properties are depth to seasonally high water table, intake rate, and permeability 
after prolonged wetting, and depth to very slowly permeable layer. The influence of ground cover and slope 
are treated independently, not in hydrologic soil groups.

In the definitions of the classes, infiltration rate is the rate at which water enters the soil at the surface 
and is controlled by surface conditions.

Transmission rate is the rate at which water moves in the soil and is controlled by properties of the soil layers.

Hydrologic Soil Group A
Soils having high infiltration rates even when thoroughly wetted 
and consisting chiefly of deep, well-drained to excessively drained 
sands or gravels. These soils have a high rate of water 
transmission. (Low runoff potential)

Hydrologic Soil Group B
Soils having moderate infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted 
consisting chiefly of moderately deep or deep, moderately well 
or well drained soils with moderately fine to moderately coarse 
textures. These soils have a moderate rate of water transmissions.

Hydrologic Soil Group C
Soils having slow infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted, consisting 
chiefly of (1) soils with a layer that impedes the downward movement 
of water, or (2) soils with moderately fine or fine textures and slow
infiltration rate. These soils have a slow rate of water transmission.

Hydrologic Soil Group D
Soils having very slow infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted, 
consisting chiefly of (1) clayey soils with high swelling capacity 
or potential, (2) soils with a high permanent water table, (3) soils 
with a claypan or clay layer at or near the surface, and (4) shallow 
soils over nearly impervious materials. These soils have a very slow 
rate of water transmission. (High runoff potential)

Dual Hydrologic Groups
Dual hydrologic groups, A/D, B/D and C/D, are given for criteria with soils 
that can be adequately drained. The first letter applies to the drained 
condition and the second to the undrained condition. Only soils that are 
rated D in their natural condition are assigned to dual groups.

